Is there a link between our oral health
and our fertility?
Yes. This is some of the newest research
that's coming out and they found that
over 90% of men who wasn't able to
conceive with their partners had an oral
disease. With those who got treated,
there was a 70% improvement in
pregnancy. Now, research has also found
that if a woman has gum disease, it
takes them 2 months longer to conceive.
And I'm the only one who's talking about
it.
And who are you?
I am the saliva queen.
Dr. Dr. Victoria Samson is the
trailblazing dentist
whose datadriven research has uncovered
the shocking link between our mouths
and some of the world's most destructive
conditions. More than 90% of diseases
can be traced back to our microbiomes.
And we now understand that having an
imbalanced oral microbiome increases
your risk of high blood pressure, heart
disease, Alzheimer's, rheumatoid
arthritis, and even men who have gum
disease are 2.85 times more likely to
have erectile dysfunction.
Really?
Yeah. And then another study also showed
there's oral bacteria that can make
cancer more aggressive and harder to
treat as well.
But what is it that causes all of this?
Poor oral hygiene, sugar, stress, but
also some of us genetically will have
mutations which can cause disease. But
there's ways to fix it. For example, I
had a patient who had terrible arthritis
and terrible gum disease. And when I
treated the gum disease, her rheumatoid
arthritis got better to the point where
she was actually able to walk again.
Wow.
Yeah.
So, let's talk about what we can do
about it. Is there any time where I
shouldn't brush my teeth? Do I spit or
rinse after I've brushed my teeth?
Chewing gum, coffee, mouthwash, good or
bad for me?
Let's go through all of that. So,
weirdly,
this has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to, and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much.
Dr. Victoria Samson, what is the mission
that you're on?
Um, my mission is to show people that
the mouth is the gateway to the rest of
the body. And if they really want to
achieve full body health, it starts with
the mouth first.
I've never heard of the term oral
microbiome
really until I met you and went through
all of your work and your research and I
think many people listening to this now
also probably aren't familiar with that
term or and also the importance of that
term. So if you had to make a case to
someone like me who's really unfamiliar
with this subject as to why it's so
important from a very topline
perspective,
what would you say? I think everyone
knows that their gut has a microbiome.
And for the past 10 years, we've always
talked about how you can change your
diet, probiotics, prebiotics for the gut
microbiome. But what a lot of people
don't understand is that the oral
microbiome is the second largest and
most diverse microbiome after the gut.
It's also a lot easier to change and
actually it's been shown to have a
massive impact on general health. So,
uh, having an imbalanced oral microbiome
increases your risk of oral diseases
like gum disease and decay, but also can
increase your risk of other systemic
diseases like high blood pressure, heart
disease, infertility, Alzheimer's. Um,
and it's something that is so easy to
manage and balance.
How many people does this impact and how
many people is it relevant to? So, an
understanding of my or oral microbiome
is going to help me in a number of ways
as it relates to my overall health. But
how many people does it really really
have an impact on?
I think it depends on what you're trying
to get out of the oral microbiome
testing. Um, I would argue that it
benefits everyone. We all have teeth. We
all have mouths. Um, and everything that
we do, every time we breathe, we eat, we
drink, we kiss, uh, we are impacting our
oral microbiome every single time. And
then every time we swallow or we breathe
that bacteria that is putting into our
mouth will travel elsewhere to the rest
of the body and cause problems
elsewhere.
You said it's the second biggest
microbiome in the body.
Yeah.
How many bacteria are in my oral
microbiome?
So you have 700 approximately 700
different bacteria which make up two
billion bacteria overall. And what's
also very weird about the oral
microbiome compared to any of the other
microbiomes is that you've got lots of
different environments or niches within
the same mouth. So, if you think about
the bacteria that would like to live
under the gums or at the back of your
throat or on your teeth, they're all
very different environments. Some are
hot, cold, you know, wet. And so, you've
got lots and lots of different parties
of bacteria within the same microbiome
in the mouth.
Okay. And you mentioned a second ago
that things like kissing, breathing,
swallowing have an impact on my oral
microbiome.
Yes.
In a significant way that I need to know
about.
Uh, yes. So, it's more about how often
you're doing those certain habits. So,
you know, for example, with kissing, the
research has shown that you need to kiss
more than 11 times a day for you to be
sharing the same bacteria or microbiome
as your partner. Um, but also even the
habits that we have, um, the air quality
that we have, everything will dictate
the environment that our mouths are
living in and therefore what bacteria
will live in our mouths. And on the
subject of oral diseases and things like
tooth decay, how many people are
impacted globally by oral diseases?
So the World Health Organization has
come out um saying that 3.5 billion
people have some sort of oral disease.
They've also found that 10% of our world
population are suffering from severe gum
disease which makes gum disease one of
the most prevalent inflammatory
conditions um in the whole body. this
conversation around the oral microbiome.
Have you seen it developing over the
over recent years, have you seen it
become more sort of pertinent to people
in society?
Massively. I think I've been doing this
for for years. It's been something that
I've loved. Um, and no one really knew
what I was talking about most of the
time. They all thought I was a bit of a
dreamer. Even dentists, patients, they
all thought, okay, well, doesn't really
matter, does it? But in the last year or
two, I've had people traveling from all
around the world just to get their oral
microbiome tested to understand more
about what's going on in their body. And
I think we're seeing a shift in the
generations in terms of this new
generation want to understand their
health a lot more. So we're all sitting
there wearing, you know, trackables,
wearables. We're, you know, calculating
how much sleep we have, how much we're
eating. And for uh now we're actually
also wanting to understand our oral
health. So that trust between a dentist
and the patient is not necessary
anymore. We want to actually understand
what's going on in their mouths and
actually, you know, be able to track
things, see what bacteria we have, how
much inflammation we have, our risk of
diseases, and what we can do to change
that.
Last question before I ask you a more
sort of personal question about
yourself. Um, what other diseases in my
body or sort of implications in my body
are linked and can be traced back to the
oral microbiome? We now understand that
more than 90% of diseases can be traced
back to an imbalanced microbiome. Uh if
we zone into just the oral microbiome,
it's got connections with infertility,
heart disease, diabetes, Alzheimer's,
rheumatoid arthritis. Um and the list
goes on. Erectile dysfunction. Um and
what's also very interesting going back
to your question about you know is there
been a new interest in this in the last
few years we've actually been able to
show that there is a strong connection
and causation between the oral
microbiome and general diseases whereas
prior to maybe 5 years ago there was a
lot of kind of is this correlation is it
just that okay there's the same risk
factors with gum disease and with heart
disease for example smoking and now
we're actually seeing that no it's not
just correlation there is strong
causation between the two.
And who are you?
Um, I am Victoria Samson. I'm a dentist.
Um, I do a lot on the oral microbiome.
Um, people call me the saliva queen.
That's my name on the streets.
And what's your sort of what
professional experiences and education
have brought you here today? And how
long have you been doing that? How many
mouths and how much saliva have you
seen? Give me a a sort of a a big view
on the the wealth of experience you have
on this subject. Um so originally I
trained as a dentist. Um and that's six
years of training. Um I would say I was
a pretty traditional conventional
dentist as I graduated. Um I'd done some
training um at the Karolinska Institute
during my university and the the
Karolinska Institute is the best dental
school in the world. Um but they're very
focused on the mouthbody connection on
testing saliva. Um, and what they
thought was that, you know, you go to
your doctor and you have a blood test.
Why don't you go to your dentist and get
a saliva test? So, from even dental
school, I had this in the back of my
mind, but I still didn't have the
training. And so, I just became a
dentist. Um, I was working half NHS,
half private, and then as time evolved,
I then, um, shifted to fully private.
Um, and then when COVID happened, um, I
started doing a lot of research and all
the dental practices were closed across
the country. Um, and I thought that was
crazy because basically the government
was saying dental practices, uh, or
dentistry is not a necessity. So, uh, I
thought that was insane. And so I
decided to do a lot of research and I
wrote a paper which was connecting, um,
oral health with poor with CO
complications. So what we found was that
patients who had poor oral health or gum
disease were at a much higher risk of
COVID complications. Um and then that
evolved into me doing some studies with
universities and hospitals. But the
issue was that we couldn't go into um
hospitals and check people's teeth and
gums because they had CO. So instead
what we did was we would collect their
saliva and we would take it to the lab
and we had this beautiful snapshot of
what was going on in a patient's mouth
at that moment in time just from their
saliva. So we did a lot of research and
we found that uh COVID sufferers or
patients who had gum disease were nine
times more likely to have COVID
complications. But also what I took from
that was that why aren't we using saliva
you know more regularly? Why don't we
use this in more commercial aspect and
for our patients. So after that I
devoted a lot of time into developing
oral microbiome testing. We had gut
microbiome testing. you've got urinary
microbial, you've got every single
microbiome has a test, but the oral
microbiome didn't really have one. So, I
built one of the first oral microbiome
tests in Europe um and that was a couple
of years ago and then now have come out
and uh kind of left and created my own
one um about a couple of weeks ago.
That research you mentioned,
specifically the research paper which
was titled, could there be a link
between oral hygiene and severity of co
infections
was the first research paper to link gum
disease with worse co complications and
I was reading that it was the most cited
research paper by the one of the sort of
dentistry publications.
Yeah. Yeah. So the British dental
journal is one of the most cited and
viewed articles. Um and what it also
helped do was um the World Health
Organization and SAGE picked that up and
they said, "Oh, wait a second. I think
that oral health is really important for
general health and also we should reopen
dental practices." So this also paved
the way for dental practices reopening
later on.
What's going on there? Can you explain
that to me like a 10-year-old? So if I
have a bad or a unhealthy oral
microbiome, I'm nine times more likely
to end up in ICU with CO complications.
What what's the link?
So there's a few. So the first one is
inflammation. So CO we know um it
releases a lot of inflammatory markers.
So it's what we call the cytoine storm.
So it's essentially the storm of lots
and lots of inflammatory markers. And
gum disease separately um is essentially
inflammation of the gums. And so what
gum disease does is it releases lots of
inflammatory markers from the mouth
elsewhere to the rest of the body. So
then when you add those together and you
have your cytoine storm from COVID and
you've got your inflammatory markers
from gum disease, it's just adding
petrol to the fire. So you're just
making that cytoine storm even worse.
Um but then on the separate side, it's
also bacteria. So if you look at the um
autopsies and the research of CO uh
patients um most of them didn't die from
the virus itself. You no one really died
from COVID 19. They died from
complications. So the number one
complication was actually a bacterial
infection. So imagine your body you've
got COVID you are really unwell and your
immune system is on absolute overdrive.
This is the prime time for bacteria to
come into your body and to cause what we
call a bacterial super infection. And so
actually when you looked at the
autopsies of a lot of these patients,
they had oral bacteria from their mouth
traveling to their lungs and causing
bacterial super infections which would
result in things like pneumonia. And
that's actually the cause of death for
most patients.
You don't really think that your oral
microbiome can be fatal. It can kill
you.
No. And even I think as a dentist we
weren't really taught how important
bacteria was or how important the mouth
was for the rest of the body. Uh the
number the only one that we ever learned
um and a lot of people would know this
one is that if you um have heart surgery
you can't actually have a hygiene for
about 6 months after the heart surgery.
A dental hygiene.
Yes. And the reason for that is because
you're at a very high risk risk of
something called infective endocarditis.
So this is oral bacteria which travels
down to a faulty heart valve um and can
actually cause death. Um so we know that
but we never really look at it for other
diseases or other problems.
I want to um I want to take a step back
before we go through the links between
our oral microbiome and all of these
diseases. But also I really want to also
talk about how what we can do about it
because I've got so many questions
around it. I've got all of these
products down below my chair from
mouthwashes to toothpaste to all these
kinds of things which I want to talk
about as well. But just taking a step
back to something that one of my guests
previously was telling me about. I think
it was James Nester. He was telling me
that the the mouth itself and the jaw
because of processed foods is an
abnormal shape. And when I say abnormal,
I mean um in relation to how it was
supposed to develop because we're eating
so many processed foods which aren't,
you know, which are designed to be easy
to chew. the mouth itself and the jaw
have changed. Is there any truth in
that?
Yeah, 100%. So, there was a man called
Western Price um and he was a dentist
and he basically suspected that and he
was like, "This is strange. Why is it
that um people who are in more
industrialized and westernized areas
have higher levels of decay and they
have loads of crowding?" So, they had
basically lots of crowding of the teeth
um and sper jaws. And so he basically
traveled around the world and he looked
at lots of different um tribes,
villages, countries and he compared the
teeth of uh for example twins. One twin
would be in a very industrialized
westernized area and the other one was
not. And what he found was that in the
twins who were in these
non-industrialized areas, they were
eating harder foods. Uh they were having
less sugar and actually their jaws
developed a lot better. So they didn't
have crowding. They had perfect teeth
actually and they had no decay compared
to the children or the the twins who are
in more industrialized areas and it is
because our food now has become so
processed. A lot of children are not
having hard foods. Um and so we don't
develop the jaws and the muscles at an
early age and so the teeth haven't
changed size. The teeth are exactly the
same size as they were previously. But
what we're seeing is that those teeth um
don't have any space to grow anymore and
that's when we're getting crowding. And
can you see that in any of those models?
So, uh, yeah, in this model you can
actually see at the very back. So, a lot
of people will have wisdom teeth. Um,
and, uh, one of the biggest issues at
the moment is that a lot of people have
impacted wisdom teeth. So, this is
basically, imagine your teeth are all
upright. Your wisdom tooth is coming out
at a completely horizontal angle and
it's pushing on the rest of the teeth.
It's an absolute nightmare as a dentist
to take out. It's even more of a
nightmare for a patient to have to
endure. But also we're seeing that there
are a lot more impacted wisdom teeth um
in the last 30 40 years than there were
previously
uh because the diets have changed.
Because the diets have changed a lot
more children are needing orthodontic
treatment now as well just because they
have crowded teeth. Teeth are
overlapping um and so they need braces
to straighten those teeth out. If you
think about cavemen, cavemen didn't have
dentists. They didn't have braces. They
didn't even use toothpaste. But they
didn't die from gum disease or decay or
crowded teeth. So, it's been something
in our industrialized or more kind of
westernized diet that has changed that.
My wisdom tooth is coming through on my
left side at the moment and I think
actually also my right side at the same
time. And I'm 32 years old now. So, I'm
like, why why the hell am I growing
teeth at 32 years old? I thought I was
on my way out or something. Um, so I got
two questions just before we crack on,
which is what the hell is a wisdom
tooth? Why is it called a wisdom tooth
and why is it coming through at 32 years
old?
Um, so we have teeth erupting at
different kind of times of our lives. So
usually you have your baby teeth, they
will erupt up to the age of about 6 or 7
years old. Um, and then you have your
adult teeth coming through and usually
they will stop erupting around 12 years
old. Um, and then you have nothing.
You're chilling. You have nothing,
nothing, nothing nothing until about
maybe 18, 19 years old. And that's where
you start to get your wisdom teeth. The
name behind wisdom teeth from what I
understand is because it's it erupts
when you're older. It's when you have
more wisdom and you're more wise. So I'm
wise now.
So you're just very wise.
Okay, makes sense.
And so some people will get it at 18.
Some people don't have any wisdom teeth.
Some people will have wisdom teeth which
erupt perfectly and are all completely
fine. and others will have their wisdom
teeth tooth erupt at 32 years old and
maybe be a little bit impacted or cause
problems. So, they're also very strange
teeth. Um, they're very unpredictable
the way that they are.
Is there any evolutionary basis for why
we need them? There must be some kind of
evolutionary reason for them.
Not that I understand. What is also
happening is that um apparently and this
is some research is that less people are
having wisdom teeth because more
children or or adults are getting their
wisdom teeth taken out and as evolution
goes um eventually some people are
actually not having wisdom teeth at all
because their ancestors haven't had
wisdom teeth so why would they have
wisdom teeth? Um but overall no there's
no real need for wisdom teeth. I never
like to take them out unless needed
because I mean more teeth
the better
the better and you never know if you
have to have something taken out and we
can use your wisdom teeth for something.
If I were to look at my ancestors from
500 years ago, you said they don't have
dentists, they don't have toothpaste and
all those kinds of things. But you also
said they don't have tooth tooth decay.
Yeah.
Does that not therefore mean that I
shouldn't need a dentist and I shouldn't
need toothpaste or mouthwash or floss?
If you had a caveman diet, then
potentially you might not need
toothpaste, floss, or even a toothbrush.
Um, and there's a lot of argument as to,
you know, there's a lot of people out
there saying, you know, you don't need
to use any toothpaste, you don't need
floss, anything like that. And fine, go
ahead, do that. But only if you are
going to be eating, you know, meat, raw
meat sometimes, and you're only drinking
water and you're not having anything in
your diet which has any sugar or
carbohydrates in it.
I mean, doesn't that speak to what the
perfect diet is supposed to be? Can't we
tell what the perfect diet is supposed
to be by looking at the mouth?
Yeah. So, uh, another issue is that with
a lot of the food that we eat now, um,
they have a lot more sugar in them and
that will impact the acidity of your
saliva. And essentially what decay is
is, uh, you have sugar or you have some
sort of carbohydrates and you've got
this bacteria in your mouth and they
feed on that sugar. And as they feed on
that sugar, they release acid. Um, and
if that acid is left there, then it can
cause demineralization of your teeth.
and that demineralization will end up
with decay.
Okay. So, let's talk about the personal
oral microbiome. Um, is my oral
microbiome different from say Jack's
over there and from my girlfriends?
Yes. Massively.
Massively different.
Yes. Maybe massively I would say. Um, so
one of the issues that I used to have
was I was doing lots of oral microbiome
testing. Um, and I would have, you know,
let's say you and your girlfriend do an
oral microbiome test and both of you, I
would see your results and they would
come out pretty much the same because
we're only looking at certain bacteria.
We can't look at all 700. So, we would
look at the top 20 bacteria that cause
problems. So, I would look at both of
them and then I would look inside your
mouth and one of you, I don't know in
this case, had raging gum disease and
terrible, terrible oral health and the
other person would be completely fine.
So then I realized that actually it's
not just bacteria that causes disease or
problems, it's how your body responds to
that bacteria and the strains of
bacteria that you have as well. So for
every bacteria um there'll be multiple
strains and some of those strains can be
really aggressive and really horrible
for your mouth and other strains are
completely fine and are not going to
cause you any problems. So when I
developed my test, what we did is we
looked at strains. So we looked at the
strains of certain bacteria um and we
would be able to differentiate between
patients who had the really bad strains
and the really good strains. But then
also we looked at the ratio of good and
bad bacteria in someone's mouth. So
their diversity as well as their genetic
mutations and also their inflammation.
So when you put all of it together and
you it's like a puzzle piece then you
can actually have a better insight into
someone's oral health. So, I guess my
answer is that everyone's oral
microbiome is a little bit different,
but it's also how your body responds to
that microbiome and bacteria that really
dictates whether or not you're going to
have disease or problems.
So, you could be someone who takes care
of their teeth really, really well, but
still have a bad oral microbiome
relationship with the rest of your body
effectively.
Yeah. And I see it every day. And we
have a lot of patients who suffer from
terrible gum disease and they come to me
and they brush three times a day.
They've never touched a cigarette. They
have immaculate oral hygiene. They eat
very well, but they have terrible gum
disease. And for those patients, they
might have genetic mutations that
predispose them to gum disease and to
inflammation. So even the smallest
amount of bacteria, their body responds
in a very aggressive and inflammatory
destructive way, which can cause
disease.
When I was speaking to I think it was
Tim Spectre about the gut microbiome, he
was telling me that the gut microbiome
turns over, i.e. the bacteria dies every
couple of days or weeks or something.
How often does the oral microbiome die
turn over and why does that matter?
So, what's interesting or different
between the oral and gut microbiome? The
oral microbiome, if someone doesn't go
in there and mechanically disrupt the
bacteria and the plaque in your mouth,
then that bacteria can stay forever. So,
the gut, what happens is you've got
something called paristelis. got
movement. So the bacteria moves, it it
changes, it regenerates, there's
turnover in the mouth. So the teeth are
the only non-shedding surfaces in the
whole body. So that
non-shedding surfaces.
So imagine if you if you never had a
shower in your life. Uh you would still
selfwash because the skin cells would
shed.
Mhm.
But if you never brushed your teeth,
then your teeth are not shedding.
They're going to stay like that. So that
bacteria will just keep on growing and
growing and growing and growing and
you'll get this really thick plaque. So
that's why actually the oral microbiome
you need to mechanically remove that
bacteria and that's why brushing your
teeth is super important or um using the
correct toothpaste or etc. going and
seeing your hygienist because you need
to mechanically remove that bacteria
quite regularly.
Okay. And the the two ways I was reading
in your work it said that the two ways
that oral health impacts overall health
are by the spreading of bacteria and the
other sort of central issue is it causes
inflammation.
So on this point of spreading bacteria
I'm always concerned this is a bit of a
superstitious thing but anytime that I'm
sick I'm always like don't part of me is
like don't swallow because in my head I
think if I'm sick in my mouth or if I've
got um like a sore throat or something
I'm like if I swallow it the rest of my
body is going to get sick. It's super
super superstitious, but is there any
truth to any of this?
Um, so not from just being sick like a
common cold. And it's actually really
interesting. I had a patient yesterday
and bless him, he's very young, 7 years
old. Um, and he had exactly that same
mindset. He just randomly woke up one
day and he said, "This is kind of gross.
Why am I swallowing my saliva? There's
all these bad bugs and gross things in
my saliva and I'm swallowing it every
day and it's traveling to the rest of my
body at seven." And so what he ended up
doing was refusing to swallow his own
saliva. And so he would basically just
dribble and he would just wipe his the
saliva off with a sleeve or he'd carry a
towel with him and just wipe it. So
bless him, he had a big rash around his
his um his face. Um and it it was a bit
of a weird moment for me because I was
like, you're kind of right. Like I mean
it is a bit weird especially as a child
to sit there and think like yeah you've
got 700 different bacteria two billion
bacteria overall and then you're
swallowing it and it can travel
elsewhere to the rest of the body. So
yes in in short yes bacteria from your
mouth when you swallow it can travel
elsewhere to the rest of the body.
However a lot of the bacteria um dies.
So the acid in the stomach can kill a
lot of the bacteria. So it's only the
really really bad bacteria that are able
to survive and cause problems. And
that's why it's so important that you
have a good oral microbiome and you
balance it well.
And the other central way that it can
cause
negative impacts to your overall health
is via inflammation. What is the link
between inflammation and my my oral
microbiome? So it's uh something that we
call lowgrade chronic inflammation and
imagine so you've got this delicate
balance of bacteria in your mouth which
is your microbiome and we all have bad
bacteria in our mouths but most of us
hopefully have better levels or higher
levels of the good bacteria. So there's
always that balance and what happens in
an imbalanced oral microbiome is that
shift changes. So you get higher levels
of bad bacteria and you don't have
enough good bacteria. These bad bacteria
firstly yes they can travel elsewhere to
the rest of your body as you discussed.
The second is that they can release
inflammatory markers. So they basically
release inflammation and this
inflammation can travel from your mouth
to the rest of your body and contribute
to inflammation elsewhere. So for
example if you had rheumatoid arthritis
and then you had inflammation from your
gums that inflammation from your gums is
making your arthritis in your wrists
worse. So it's contributing to it. Now
what's also interesting and that's why
it's called lowgrade chronic
inflammation is often you wouldn't even
know that you have it. I have so many
patients who say oh you know my gums
bleed but that's normal. If your eye
bled or if your foot was bleeding every
day you would be worried and you would
think actually there's inflammation
here. There's a problem here. But so
many people have bleeding gums and they
don't understand that bleeding gums is a
sign. It's your gums screaming to you
saying that I have inflammation and that
inflammation can travel. And then the
third mechanism as well. So there's one
more is um it's damage to your blood
vessels. So again the same bad bacteria
in your mouth. It releases these
enzymes, these toxic enzymes and they
can travel through the rest of your body
through your blood vessels and they can
actually damage your blood vessels. So
these blood vessels are not able to
dilate and constrict as well as they
used to.
On that point of arthritis, I read a
stat which um I believe is true. I think
it actually came from some of your
research that said people with
rheumatoid arthritis are eight times
more likely to develop gum disease than
patients without rheumatoid arthritis.
Yes.
Which is shocking.
Yeah. So there's a really strong um
birectional relationship between
rheumatoid arthritis and gum disease. So
that means that if you have really bad
rheumatoid arthritis, you will have
pretty bad gum disease. And if you treat
your rheumatoid arthritis, your gum
disease will get better. and vice versa.
If you have if you treat the gum
disease, your rheumatoid arthritis will
get better. And that was actually one of
the um first patients that really got me
on my journey of the mouthbody
connection. So like yeah, I was doing
the saliva testing. I got it. You know,
I was like, "Okay, cool. We are
quantifying oral health. We're tracking
things." But even me, I wasn't really
fully sold on this whole mouthbody
connection, how our mouth is connected
to the rest of the body. So, I had a
patient who was sent to me by um her
functional medicine practitioner and she
had been seen by uh four or five
different practitioners. She had
terrible rheumatoid arthritis and she um
went to this final guy and he was the
first guy to ever ask her, "Have you
ever had your teeth checked? What's
happened?" And she said, "Oh, I've had a
few teeth taken out in the last year or
two, about six teeth, but you know, it's
just it is what it is." And he was like,
"I I don't think that's normal." So he
sent her to me and he was like, "Can you
do your saliva stuff that you do and see
if there's anything up going on there?"
And we did do a saliva test, we saw that
she had super high levels of
inflammation, of collagen breakdown, um
high levels of bad bacteria. And what
was the most important was that when I
treated her gum disease, she had
terrible gum disease and that's why she
was losing her teeth. When I treated the
gum disease properly and aggressively,
um, yes, her gums healed, but more
importantly, her rheumatoid arthritis
got better to the point where she was
actually able to get off steroids and
medication and be able to walk again.
Wow.
Yeah.
By treating her gum disease.
Yeah. And I think that, you know,
sometimes as a dentist, we treat a lot
of gum disease and we treat a lot of
things and we don't necessarily see the
systemic consequences because the
patient doesn't come back or you know um
or it's such a small impact that you
don't necessarily see it. But this was
the one time where I was like wow like
what we do is actually really really
insightful and really important. And you
mentioned alongside that um inflammation
also has an impact on cardiovascular
functioning and health. I believe it's
the case that cardiovascular disease is
the biggest killer in the world from
what I understand. Um so I was wondering
if if you knew any of the stats that
show the impact or the the increased
likelihood of me having a heart attack
or a stroke or something based on my
oral microbiome.
So um the research has shown that if you
have gum disease you are at a 20% higher
chance of high blood pressure. Um but
also they are now saying that up to 30
to 40% of cardiac um issues in hospital
can be traced back to an oral bacteria
um causing problems in the heart valve.
Um so the reason for this connection so
yes inflammation but also going back to
that third mechanism I told you which
was about the vasoc constriction so the
blood vessels constricting and dilating.
So these toxic enzymes which are being
released by the bacteria they travel
through the blood um and they basically
stop the blood vessels from being able
to widen and lots of blood to travel to
the heart and also to constrict and that
also is um one of the biggest
connections with uh heart disease.
I found this stat which might well be
from your work or someone else's. It's
from the study called the association
between parodontitis and blood pressure
highlighted in systemic systemically
healthy individuals.
Not mine but okay. And it found that
people with gum disease were twice as
likely to have a heart attack and three
times as likely to have a stroke than
those without inflammatory gum disease,
which is absolutely staggering.
Yeah. And then another study also showed
that when you treated someone's gum
disease, their levels of CRP, and CRP is
an inflammatory marker that you can
check in your blood, the levels of CRP
significantly reduced. And for a lot of
patients who suffer from heart
conditions, they will get their CRP
quite regularly checked through blood
testing.
And so this is a way of reducing their
inflammation is just by having a a
simple hygiene. And I've even seen um
particularly in America, there's a lot
of um uh cardiac surgeons and um doctors
related to to heart health um who are
now actually working with dentists
because they understand that if they
work together, then they're going to
have far better results for their
patients. And this is this is that
swallowing thing we're talking about.
This is because you're swallowing that
bad bacteria.
Yeah. And your heart valve um imagine if
it's been it's faulty. Imagine you just
had surgery. I always think of it like
it's sticky. It's like velcro. So it's
really prone to infection and problems.
It's just like if you fell over and you
had a scab and you were rolling around
in mud all the time, you would get
bacteria going into that scab and
causing problems. There's the same thing
with your heart valves.
Doesn't the bacteria just travel on its
own anyway? Cuz I feel like it's in my
mouth. So I feel like it I don't know
these are living organisms don't they
just like find their way down even if I
don't swallow.
Yeah even through your blood um and also
through your gums as well. So you can
swallow your bacteria breathe it or it
can go through your blood.
At the start of this conversation we're
talking you mentioned the sort of
implications for your cardiovascular
system and one of the things you said
was erectile dysfunction and that was
slightly alarming to me as a man
um who's trying to stay away from
erectile dysfunction. What is what is
the research that supports this idea
that my oral microbiome can have an
impact on my erectile functioning?
So men who have periodontal disease are
2.85 times more likely to suffer from
erectile dysfunction.
2.8 times.
Yeah.
Is I'm pretty sure that's 280% isn't it?
Okay. So what is this perodontal
disease?
Gum disease. Okay. So uh it's kind of I
would say it's a bit of a spectrum. So
the early stages of perodontal disease
or gum disease is just gum inflammation.
So that's that patient who is brushing
their teeth, spits in the basin and sees
blood. So that's the you know the early
inflammation. If they don't get that
checked out and sorted that will just
continue and continue and continue to
what we call gum disease. Um and that's
where yes you've got inflammation but
actually you have really high levels of
bad bacteria now. And this bacteria is
essentially eating away the gums and
also your bone. And uh it's it's now
become irreversible.
I'm just going to have a swig of this
for your thought this
and then at the very end of the spectrum
is people who are losing their teeth
having really terrible gum infections
and all of these kind of mouthbody
connections that we're talking about.
Okay. And that can you just explain
again as if I'm 10 the how my how that
gum disease that parodontitis is it
called
has an impact on my penis I don't
understand like I don't understand the
link it makes all of my blood vessels
exactly
yes so it essentially stops your blood
vessels from dilating
and so you've got reduced blood flow to
your penis
okay
and therefore
doesn't work
okay so this is an emergency this stuff
this is really is important
that's the one statistic whenever I have
a and in the chair and he's like, "Oh, I
don't want to brush my teeth." I'm like
2.85 times more likely to have erectile
dysfunction. They usually will go
straight to the bathroom to brush their
teeth.
The other thing, no, but it's true, but
also the other thing that I I read in
your research, which I found really
really um shocking is the link between
my oral health, my oral microbiome, and
cancer.
Yeah.
I was reading specifically about female
breast cancer,
um which I know is affects a lot of
women. um what is the link there between
breast cancer cancer generally and our
oral microbiome.
So this is um I would say some of the
newest emerging research that's coming
out. So with breast cancer um I didn't
know this before this research came out
but your breast has uh its own
microbiome. So that tissue within the
breast um different bacteria are able to
grow. And what they found was that in
women who had breast cancer, they had
high levels of certain oral bacteria in
their breast microbiome. So the oral
bacteria is called fusobacterium
nucleatum. And they compared the breast
microbiomes of patients who didn't have
breast cancer versus those who had
breast cancer.
Sorry, what's an oral what's a breast
microbiome?
Just the collection of bacteria in your
breast.
Okay.
Yeah. Um I didn't even know there was a
microbiome in your breast either, but
apparently so. And um so when they
compared a healthy um woman uh her
breasts to a woman who had breast
cancer, the woman who had breast cancer
had very high levels of the specific
oral bacteria called fusobacterium
nucleotum in their breast. Um there's
also been research on colurectal cancer.
Um and actually Apple News came out with
something couple of months ago which was
nice to see them kind of just spreading
the word. But what they found was that
in patients who had colarctal cancer um
more than 50% of them had the the exact
same oral bacteria from the breast
cancer study that fusobacterium
nucleotum in the colons and what they
found was that oral bacteria uh made the
cancer more aggressive and harder to
treat as well.
I was reading about a study in mice um
that linked that oral bacteria to tumor
growth. Mhm.
Are you familiar with that study?
Yes. And it's that specific oral
bacteria. So the fusacter nucleotum
which has been shown to accelerate tumor
growth um within mice but also um for
colorectal cancer and breast cancer as
well.
And what's your belief there? I know
this research is fairly new but do you
think there is a a causal relationship a
significant causal relationship between
the health of our oral microbiome and
our probability of developing some form
of cancer?
I wouldn't yet say causal. I think that
for most cancers it is multiffactorial
and there are a lot of things that can
impact whether or not you get the cancer
and how aggressive the cancer is. Um I
do think that oral health and some
specific oral bacteria um are risk
factors and can definitely increase the
um aggression of those cancers or even
the initiation of them. Um there's also
been research and I think I'm waiting
for the research to be published on what
they're doing is they've created a
antibiotic which only kills that oral
bacteria that I was talking about. So
fusobacterium nucleiatum and they are
going to be issuing that uh antibiotic
to those patients who have the colctal
cancer which has the oral bacteria to
see whether or not it slows down their
progression or improves their their
prognosis. So if I see those results and
it shows it, then there's for sure a
strong positive link between the two.
But for now, I would say that it's
multiffactorial and it's definitely a
risk factor.
That oral bacteria that you're
describing that you called it fuzo
bacterium.
Yeah.
What is it that causes that? Is it
something that I'm eating? Is it a
lifestyle choice I'm making?
Uh multiple things. Poor oral hygiene.
Um some of us genetically will have
higher levels of it. Um it's what we
eat. It's who we're kissing. It's what
we're breathing in.
Does my girlfriend have it?
So, we would have to see. Um, but it's
uh and that's the thing. That's the
beauty of being able to test these
things now is that you can actually see
and also what's it's strange is that
green tea um you know something so
simple is extremely effective at killing
fusoacterium nucleotum. So, it's just
knowing those types of things, being
able to do the test, knowing the right
treatment plans and recommendations
based from that. We know green tea is
good for us and now we can really
understand why.
Okay, that's interesting. You you have
actually tested Jack over there, right?
And you said to me before we started
recording that he's got a ton of that
fuzo bacterium.
Uh yes, he does. Yeah.
And it's really getting out of control.
That's what you said.
Really badly out of control. Yeah. So,
I've um
I've given him a big vat of green tea as
a gift.
Green tea?
Yes,
green tea.
This guy's going to edit that out. This
is the problem.
me up.
Green tea.
Yeah,
that's good for my own microbiome.
Yeah, really good. Stains, but really
good. Um, it's anti-inflammatory. Um, it
helps with what we call oxidative
stress. So, this is um, basically stress
of for the body. Um, and it's
antibacterial. So, it actually is very
effective at killing fusobacterium
nuclei.
What is your opinion of the impact that
coffee has on my oral microbiome? I'm
slightly biased because I love coffee.
Okay.
But there is no negative impact of
coffee on the oral microbiome directly.
Um coffee does dry your mouth out. Um
and so you have reduced saliva and that
can actually cause problems for the oral
microbiome. So the saliva is super
important in your mouth. It provides all
of the food, the proteins, everything
for the bacteria in your mouth. So, it's
kind of like this delivery service. Your
delivery roots traveling around
providing all the food and bacteria um
sorry, food to the bacteria and that's
what keeps the good bacteria alive and
happy. So, when you have a dry mouth,
let's say you're drinking lots of coffee
or you're very nervous or you are on
anti-depressants for example, um which
are a big one, then you just don't have
as much saliva. So you those bacteria
don't have as much food and those
bacteria die and then you get bad
bacteria growing in replacement.
What about tea? We're a nation of tea
drinkers in the UK.
Um similar. So it also does dry your
mouth. Not as bad as coffee, but
otherwise no problems other than
staining.
What about if I put loads of sugar in
it? Cuz a lot of people put a lot of
sugar.
Okay. Yeah. No, no, no. Never. No. No.
So actually sugar in your tea is even
worse than you having a biscuit for
example. Um so because the sugar
dissolves in your hot tea and the tea is
hot when you drink it um it can actually
cause more problems. Uh another thing
with sugar is um I have a sweet tooth. I
love sugar. But it's about how you eat
your sugar. So let's say if you have
your hot tea with five lumps of sugar in
there and you're sipping it over an hour
or two, that's where you start to see a
lot of problems. So actually you need to
be having a sugar attack. So just all
the sugar in one go. And that way your
mouth has all the sugar in one go and
it's able to neutralize the saliva and
get back to a good state as quickly as
possible. Every time you sip your your
tea with sugar, what happens is that the
saliva has to go from acidic back to
neutral, acidic, back to neutral,
acidic, and then it starts to just not
work properly and the saliva just stays
acidic and that's where you start to see
decay.
So you want to just down the tea,
down the tea or I don't know if you're a
M&M guy, have all your M&M's in one go.
Don't snack on M&M's every 10 minutes.
What about other drinks like, I don't
know, you know, Coca-Cas and these other
sort of fizzy drinks that might have
artificial sweeteners in things like
that.
So, they're not as bad as your natural
sugars. Um, but for example, something
like your Coke or or Fanta or whatever,
it's also um very acidic. Um, and it can
actually cause erosion as well. So this
is essentially where the outer layer of
your tooth, so the enamel is just worn
away from having lots and lots of these
fizzy drinks.
Okay. So that it's not going to cause
decay in the same way, but it might
change the acidic balance which then
decays my tooth, which makes me more
susceptible to when I eat sugar to
having a problem. Okay, got
so going back to what we were talking
about the the implications of an oral
microbiome and the rest of my body,
brain health is one thing that I was
really curious about. Um, we've had lots
of conversations on this show about
Alzheimer's and dementia and just
general sort of optimal cognitive
performance as I age. Something I'm
thinking a lot about. I want to have a
sharp brain. It's quite important
because of what I do. Um, so is there a
link between my oral microbiome and my
cognitive and brain health?
Yes. Um so if we look at actually just
the the occurrence of Alzheimer's um and
gum disease or oral health, a lot of
research has shown that um if you have
gum disease for more than 10 years, you
have a 70% increased chance of
developing Alzheimer's. So that was a
study that was done on over 20,000
people and they followed them for 20
years and they saw okay if you had gum
disease um at baseline whether or not
you get Alzheimer's at 10 years or 20
years so a 70% increased chance of it um
they've also done a lot of research
where uh they've been looking at oral
bacteria and what they found was that
there are certain oral bacteria so uh
one called p gingeralis that's one of
the worst oral bacteria I would say out
of all of them. So this penjavalis is
able to travel from your mouth to your
brain. It's only it's quite close by
anyway. And what's unique about this
bacteria is it's able to cross the
barrier between uh in your brain. So the
bloodb brain barrier um and it releases
these toxic enzymes. So these enzymes
are called gingipes and they're imagined
these like horrible firefighter things
and they can break down neurons. They
can break down um a lot of brain tissue.
And so when they looked at the cerebral
spinal fluid and the brain fluid or
tissue of Alzheimer's sufferers, they
found that 97% of them had these toxic
enzymes, these ginger pains in their
brains compared to zero for the patients
who did not have Alzheimer's. So this
is, you know, the first study shows,
yes, there's some sort of correlation,
but there's a lot of other risk factors.
The second one, which is looking at your
ginger pains, is showing that there's
definitely a strong causitive factor um
between the two. And then another study
which was very interesting was um
looking at cognitive cognitive decline.
So okay fine you have Alzheimer's
unfortunately um is it is it too late
should you stop brushing your teeth or
what's the point? And so what they did
was they had uh patients um who had
Alzheimer's and they checked their
cognitive function and they also checked
their oral health. And then uh six
months later they reviewed them and they
found that the patients who had gum
disease had a much more rapid cognitive
decline than those patients who didn't
have gum disease. So again, it is still
important if you do get Alzheimer's that
you maintain your oral health, that you
have someone help you brush your teeth
because your cognitive decline um will
be faster.
How do they unpick that from other
causal factors that might be going on
like bad food choices? Because in my
head I was thinking, well, if someone's
drinking sugary, fizzy drinks every day,
they're more likely to have gum disease,
but maybe also that the chemicals within
that fizzy drink are impacting their
chances of dementia. Maybe they're also
someone that has an unhealthy lifestyle.
Maybe they're more sedentary. If they're
eating bad things, maybe they're more
sedentary. And maybe it's that that's
causing the rapid cognitive decline
versus the gum disease itself. Is it
possible to untangle all of this?
I mean, it is very difficult. I think
that for those types of things, you
either, you're right, diet, lifestyle is
super important and we know that
Alzheimer's is again multiffactorial. Um
I think it's really about the quantity
of patients that they check. So they
need to be looking at a huge number of
patients and they did um to check
whether or not there is a strong
correlation between them. Um, also going
back to the ginger pain study, so the
one about the bacteria that shows it
doesn't it's not diet or lifestyle or or
nutrition. It is a specific oral
bacteria that has traveled to the brain
and released these enzymes which are
then breaking down neurons. So there
there's definitely a strong positive um
effect.
That is um fascinating. It's really
really fascinating because dementia and
Alzheimer's still seem to be a bit of a
mystery. it is and and I work um with a
team for Alzheimer's and what they've
done similar to what you were saying is
that they've kind of separated all of
the the causes of Alzheimer's that we
know um or the risk factors and
thankfully they've put oral health as
one of them as well and I think from all
of the other risk factors so uh you know
for example if you have uh the genetic
mutations you got the APO4 or any of
those mutations that's you can't change
that unfortunately some of us have
mutations which means that we are at a
much higher risk of suff of getting
Alzheimer's in the future. But something
like that oral bacteria p gingalis and
those gingi pains you can get rid of p
ging javalis really easily again if you
tested it you can even test for gingi
pains um and then you can get rid of the
bacteria before it starts causing
problems.
The test that you offer does it test for
gingi pains?
It does. Yeah. So, we're the only ones
um on the market who do because that was
something that I thought was super
important. What's the point in us
telling you that you have a bacteria if
we can't tell you that that bacteria is
being really bad in your mouth and
causing a lot of problems?
And people think I'm joking, but you
have actually tested several members of
my team, including myself. So, I am
actually going to find out the results
today. Um on the subject matter of the
brain, is there a link between my mental
health, depression, anxiety, and my oral
microbiome?
So again, there's been a lot of
research. Um I think it's difficult for
something like mental health and um and
gum disease, which you know, with the
chicken and the egg, which one came
first? Um because one of the issues is
if you have a decline in your mental
health, you are less likely to take care
of your oral health. um and therefore
that can exacerbate issues. So there has
been a lot of research to show that you
know
uh there's a correlation between poor
mental health and poor oral health. But
in my personal opinion that causitive
connection is not there yet. Um there's
also been some research with things like
schizophrenia, but again it's the jury
still in my opinion.
Are you able to tell the state of
someone's mental health by looking at
their oral microbiome in your view?
um you can know if something's up. Like
for example, I I had a patient
relatively recently. I've been treating
her for five, six years now, and I know
that she takes good care of her her
teeth. She she takes good care of
herself. And a few weeks ago, she came
in and she was not taking care of her
gums or her teeth at all. Everything was
an absolute mess in there. And um so I
did pull her aside and I was like,
"What's wrong?" Like something's
happened here. And I think it is quite a
big um sign for a lot of people. It's
the first thing that they kind of let go
of is their oral health.
And is that because of, you know, they
start certain self soothing behaviors
because they're stressed in other parts
of their life. So if they're having a
bad time in their relationship or work
and they're stressed, they might start
eating sugar more or
or just not brushing,
smoking or drinking more. Okay.
Or just not brushing. Like with this
woman, she just wasn't brushing her
teeth anymore. Another thing that we can
also see, I mean it's kind of a bit on a
tangent, but also um eating disorders as
well. So things like bulimia um or even
sometimes anorexia, you can see in the
mouth. So there's a lot of times where
we'll see young teenagers um and I'll
know that they are bulimic because they
have certain issues in their mouth which
they shouldn't have and that again is a
telltale sign.
Is that because the stomach acid is
coming through their mouth?
Yeah. So they get a lot of erosion on
the on their teeth and then in some
cases you can also get these marks on
the roof of your mouth. So if they're
trying to force themselves to to vomit
then you can see that. Um and that's
something that you know you have to pull
the patient aside or tell their mother
and explain that to them as well.
And is there a relationship between
stress and my oral health? So if I'm
more stressed and my cortisol levels are
higher, is that going to make everything
in my mouth worse?
Yes.
Even outside of the lifestyle choices I
might make in such a state.
Yes. just that stress will increase your
inflammatory markers, your inflammation.
Um, it also will dry your mouth out and
all of those things will be linked. Um,
uh, we do a lot of testing at my clinic
and so one of the tests that we look at
is collagen breakdown. So, um, we have
lots of different types of collagen all
over our bodies and our gums are made up
of a certain collagen. So we look at an
enzyme called ammpn and this enzyme is
responsible for breaking down that
specific collagen. Um so we test the
coll that enzyme all the time with our
patients. It's a really nice way of
knowing like um whether or not someone's
about to have gum disease. Um how much
collagen breakdown is happening from a
biomolelecular level. So I had a woman
very healthy, always been fine. Um and
then she had her collagen breakdown
tested and her levels were through the
roof. her gums looked fine. She didn't
look like she had any problems, but I've
never seen such a high level in my life.
And so, you know, I'm trying to think of
what could be causing it. All of that.
And she had lost her baby a couple of
days before. And that type of intense
stress on someone's body can have so
many effects and impacts on the rest of
your body. Um, and that was one of them.
When we retested her six months later,
she was back to normal again. But you
can see even your mouth, you know,
stress can really impact you.
On this subject, I was thinking about I
mentioned Jame James Nester earlier who
was telling me about the research of um
how the the mouth has changed shape
because of the foods we're eating and
how that that's caused a bunch of
downstream implications for us. One of
the also one of the other things he also
mentioned was about mouth breathing and
nose breathing. Yes.
And there's a lot of people that have
become incredibly interested in whether
we should be breathing through our
mouths or our nose. And I was wondering
if you had a perspective on that. Um,
and also the other thing that he
mentioned to me was that there's a link
between mouth breathing and things like
ADHD. What is your point of view?
Uh, completely agree with all of that.
So actually my sister, she is an
orthodontist. Um so she works at our
clinic and um we run it together with
our mother and um she is very very hot
on um mouth breathing. And what she um
mainly does is she basically tries to
stop children in particular from
breathing with their mouths open. And
what she has found is that most of her
patients um who come to her um are mouth
breathers. They often have some sort of
um ADHD. they have or some sort of
attention deficit. Um they are uh bed
wetters. They grind their teeth a lot of
the time. Um and they have a whole
cascade of other problems and uh she can
treat it then and it's relatively easy.
She would argue that it's very
difficult, but to me I think it's easy.
I'm like, "Yeah, there we go. You can do
what you do." Um and because the the
jaws of a child are very malleable, so
they haven't fully solidified, so you
can still move things. You can um get
the teeth to meet. So if you get the
teeth to meet correctly then uh the
child won't want to breathe with their
mouth open. The annoying thing is is
that uh a lot of adults are mouth
breathers because their teeth do not
meet correctly or their jaws are in the
incorrect position and uh at that point
it is quite difficult to move the jaws
into the correct position or to get the
teeth to close in a way so that the lips
are at rest and you breathe with your
nose instead of your mouth. But again, I
see those types of patients because they
all come to me with a lot of other
problems. So again, same thing. A lot of
them have uh a lot of them have suffered
from long COVID. A lot of them have
inflammatory conditions. Um are always
tired. They a lot of them chronic
fatigue. It you know there's a lot of
connections now uh between mouth
breathing and those types of issues as
well.
Is there a link between the health of my
oral microbiome and whether I breathe
through my nose or mouth? cuz James was
explaining to me that the nose is
effectively like a a filter system.
Yeah.
There's a certain temperature in there.
Um there's like sinuses and stuff which
are have some kind of mucus which helps
to catch bacteria. So if I'm breathing
through my mouth, am I more likely to
have unhealthy oral microbiome?
100%. So exactly the same thing. You're
you're you've got a filter in your nose
and so it will stop a lot of bad things
from coming through. But the mouth uh
there is no filter. I mean you breathe
it in, it goes straight into your lungs.
So, there's no way of stopping anything.
A lot of people now are starting to
mouth tape. Um, and that's become kind
of trendy and cool. Um, it's not the
easiest thing to do. If it seems a bit
weird to tape your mouth at night time,
um, but for anyone who's worried that
they breathe with their mouth open,
mouth taping, in my opinion, is a really
nice way of just like testing it out and
seeing whether or not you do breathe
with your mouth open because you'll do
some mouth taping and you can see
whether or not you sleep better. So, if
you have a wearable, you can see, "Oh,
wow. My oxygen levels are so much
better. I had such a deep sleep." And if
that's the case, you might be more
inclined to straighten your teeth or
sort out the reason that you're
breathing with your mouth open.
I I uh took notes of a study which kind
of is interconnected to the point we
were making about mouth brea breathing
which said in a six-year study of 11,000
children. It was found that children who
suffered from sleep disordered breathing
were 50 to 90% more likely to develop
ADHD like symptoms than were normal
breathers who breathe through their nose
correctly which is absolutely
staggering. 50 to 90% more likely to
suffer from ADHD like symptoms just
because they breathe through their mouth
at night and disordered breathing.
And it's it's mainly to do with also
oxygen being delivered to your brain,
right?
So there's not as much good oxygen um
like real rich oxygen, filtered oxygen
traveling to the brain and so that's
basically not allowing your brain to
function as well.
You mentioned kissing earlier on.
Yes.
Um I'm still supposed to kiss my
partner, right?
Yes. I hope you do many times.
You you said if I kiss her more than 11
times a day or something then our oral
microbiomes synchronize in some way.
Yeah. So there is um passage of bacteria
from you to her and her to you. Um they
have also shown that uh for example they
did a study where one uh partner chewed
lots and lots of probiotics or like good
bacteria and then had a super long
smooch with their partner and actually
was able to transfer nearly 60 or 70% of
that good bacteria into their partner.
So it's not necessarily longlasting. I
wouldn't say that um you know if you
kiss someone once on a night out that
you are going to terribly impact your
microbiome. it's fine. You can go and
kiss, but it's more for long-term
partners. If you're kissing regularly
and for a long time, then yes, your
microbiomes will start to um be quite
similar. Um, another factor as well is
that obviously your lifestyles are
probably pretty similar. You're probably
using the same toothpaste, eating the
same food. So, it's difficult to fully
put it on just kissing, but yeah.
What about oral sex and the implications
that will have? So, if we're if me and
my partner are doing oral sex on each
other, is that going to impact our oral
microbiome? Yes. So, actually there's
been a few case reports which have shown
um uh there's one in particular and I
had a patient as well who had this a
woman who um had a new partner and she
liked to perform oral sex on him and
then she came to me because she was
complaining of very inflamed gums and
she was getting gingivitis
and you know it's not something I really
ask like I'm not going to be like how's
your how's your sex life going these
days like so I didn't ask it but she
kept on coming back to me No, my gums
are still inflamed. No, my gums are
still inflamed. And then she asked, she
was like, "Is it maybe because I have a
new partner?" I was like, "Okay, maybe
you guys are kissing a lot." And she was
like, "No, no, no, no." And and then she
explained to me. Um, and then I was
like, "Okay, fine. Why don't you go and
test and ask him whether or not he has
any issues." Um, and it turns out that
he was having recurrent urinary
infections. And so, actually, they were
transferring bacteria and she was having
inflammation in her gums because she was
Yeah. performing her oral sex. So, yeah,
there is transfer. Again, I wouldn't be
scared and say never do it. Um, I once
made an ex-boyfriend do an oral
microbiome test uh just to check and
just to make sure everything was okay.
You made him do it.
Yeah. I don't It's not a It's not a um a
prerequisite anymore, but it was at the
time. I was like, "H, let me see. Let me
You must think that when you meet
people. You must think, God, I wonder
what their own microbiome is saying like
in a romantic context cuz you know the
significance of it."
Yeah. I think it's a, you know, I spend
a lot of time and energy making sure my
oral microbiome is very nice and
balanced. So, I wouldn't want anyone
messing that up for me. So, it's
important.
Are you in a relationship now?
Yes, I am.
Have you tested their oral microbiome?
I've been trying to, but he won't let
me.
You've asked him.
Yeah, of course I have.
And what did he say? Mind your own
business.
But I did give him an oral microbiome
test. So, hopefully he will just use it.
I said, "You can even use a fake name. I
don't care. I don't I'm not going to
test. I'm not going to check it. I just
want you to do the test for me.
For for you?
For me? Yeah.
And what's his what's his rebuttal? He's
like, I don't
He was like, what happens if you break
up with me if I have a really imbalanced
oral microbiome? And I was like, I hope
that our relationship is stronger than
just your oral microbiome. But there's
ways to fix it. And that's the beauty of
the oral microbiome is that it's
actually pretty easy to to fix and to
change.
If his results came back and he had a
terrible oral microbiome, one of the
worst you've ever seen.
Yeah.
Are you less likely to kiss him that
day? that day. Yes.
There you go. Don't do the test, my
friend.
No, no, no. Don't do the test that day.
Yes.
There's no upside to him doing this
test. I completely understand.
And then I would go and creep into his
bathroom and change all of his oral
products. This is what he's scared
about.
Personalize everything for him. And then
you've done that already.
I already have. He tests everything out
for me as well because I get a lot of
products sent to me. So, I'm always
getting him to to try things out for me
as well.
Okay. So, no if they've got um
issues down there.
Yeah. Okay.
And we don't really know if they've got
issues down there unless they admit it
or do some kind of test.
Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. What about fertility? Is there a
link between our oral health and our
fertility?
Yes. Um so if we look at men to start
with um there was a study done and they
found so they looked at a group of
subfertile men. So, men who um weren't
able to conceive with their partners and
they checked all of their mouths and
they found that over 90% of these men
had some sort of oral infection or
dental disease of some sort going on.
They split the group into two. Half the
group had the uh treatment that was
needed. So, I don't know if they had gum
disease or decay. They they got it fixed
and the other half were left to their
own devices. Um after eight months there
was a 70% improvement um in their
success for pregnancy. The men who'd had
their oral infection sorted um and they
had a much better improvement in their
sperm quality and motility as well.
And what did they do to those men in
that group where they saw the
significant improvement? So, for
example, if the man had um gum disease,
they would treat it with hygiene or if
they had an infected tooth, maybe they
would take it out or do a root canal or
etc. They would just have to treat that
infection. So, I speak a lot about gum
disease all the time, but actually
there's so many other oral diseases like
decay um or tooth a types of things that
can also contribute inflammation and
problems. In that study, 6 months after
that, their sperm had improved by 20%.
And after 8 months, 50% of their wives
were pregnant.
Yes.
That is staggering.
Yeah.
What about women though? Is is there a
similar sort of result as it relates to
women's fertility?
Yes. So, um research has also found that
if a woman has gum disease, um she is
less likely to ovulate. Um and also
she's going to have uh issues with
conception. So they found that women
with gum disease it takes them two
months longer to conceive versus a woman
who doesn't have gum disease. Um but
once the woman has conceived um the
issue is still not over. She still has
to maintain her gums. So firstly a lot
of women will have um pregnancy
gingivitis. So this is basically super
inflamed puffy gums because of all the
hormones. Um and so they should be going
very regularly to see their hygienist.
Um but also what the research has found
is that women who are pregnant and have
gum disease are at a much higher risk of
preterm birth so premature uh babies low
birth weight um and also preclampsia as
well. So they did a study in Malawi um
it was on 10,000 women. So Malawi has
the highest rate of preterm birth in the
world at just about I think
just under 20%. Um, and preterm birth is
a a big issue for for governments, for
hospitals. It's really expensive. You
need to keep the woman and the child in
the hospital for a lot longer, but also
that child will have a whole myriad of
problems afterwards as well. So,
weirdly, Wrigley's um the sugar the
chewing gum company sponsored this uh
study. They went to Malawi. They had
these 10,000 women. They split them up
into two. 5,000 of those women uh were
given sugar-free chewing gum,
toothbrush, and some toothpaste. And the
other half were left alone. And they
found that there was a 20% improvement
um or 20% sorry, reduction in preterm
birth in the woman who'd had the
sugar-free chewing gum compared to the
woman who hadn't had it. So something so
cheap and so easy like chewing gum was
able to actually reduce the risk of
preterm birth for these women.
How and why? So, if you look into the
research a little bit more, um you're
going to get your chewing gum now.
Yes.
Um so, sugar-free chewing gum um has
been shown to um stimulate your saliva.
So, it helps with what we were talking
about earlier, saliva is super
important, um and it provides all the
good food for uh your bacteria. Um but
then also, if it's sugar-free, um let's
say it's using xylitol, that's naturally
antibacterial, so it's killing a lot of
the bacteria in the mouth. And what they
found is that there are certain oral
bacteria that can travel down to the
placenta um and can also uh cause
problems there and essentially um
increase the chance of preterm birth.
You sufficiently convinced me that
saliva is an important thing and I
actually did one of your tests. Let me
go grab the results.
Okay.
Every single time you eat, you have an
opportunity to improve your health.
That's why I love Zoe because it helps
me to make the smartest food choices for
my body. As you guys probably know, Zoe
is a sponsor of my podcast. I'm also an
investor in the company, which is
important to say. I invested in the
company because Zoe combines my health
data with their worldclass science.
Using these two things, Zoe guides me to
better health every single time I make a
food choice and eat, which means I have
more energy, better sleep, better mood,
and I'm less hungry. And the best part
about Zoey is that it's backed by their
recent clinical trial, something called
the method study, which is the gold
standard of scientific research. I
started Zoey just over a year ago now
and I've been able to track my progress
week after week so I can learn how to be
even smarter the week after. And if you
haven't joined Zoey yet, I'm going to
give you 10% off when you join Zoey
today. Just use the code Steven10 at
checkout. So many of you have asked me
for a bloody code for Zoe and here is
your opportunity. Steven 10 at checkout.
There may not be another one.
And here are
the results. Okay.
I've not actually seen them yet, so this
is exciting. Um, I'll give them to you
so you can explain them to me.
Okay.
Is that okay? So, this is the test that
I did, right?
Yes, you did. Yeah.
And the test I did contains
this little kit that basically in the
middle of the office one day, someone
came up to me and said, "Steve, can you
spit in this?" And I said, "Sure."
Yeah.
And then they took my spit away. Um, it
turns out it was upon request from you.
Yes, exactly. I wanted your saliva.
Yeah. Which is
just to check to make sure if I could do
this interview,
right? Okay.
So, this is the test that I did. I spat
in this little thing, sent it off back
to you. You ran the test. How long does
it take to do this test?
Uh, it would probably take you about 2
minutes to do spe yourself and then you
get the results three to four weeks
later.
What did you find out from doing my
test?
Well, okay,
let's go through your results. So um we
found that you have quite a diverse
microbiome. So that means that you have
a nice ratio of good bacteria versus bad
bacteria and this has been compared to
healthy and diseased subjects. So you
are really right on the top of the bell
curve. So very good with that. So happy.
Um then we predict your
diverse is better.
Uh arguably yes. Yeah.
Okay. Um then what we have is we've
created this algorithm that predicts
your risk of certain um issues or
diseases in the mouth. So those are
things like bad breath, gum disease, um
decay and general inflammation.
So your risk of bad breath was low. You
didn't have a high risk for that. Gum
disease was medium. So slight maybe
there's a bit of inflammation going on
there. Your risk for uh decay was also
medium. And your risk for general
inflammation. So this is inflammation
throughout the rest of your body. Um was
quite low. Um and then if we zoom in, we
then look at your good bacteria. So
we're also quite unique because we
thought that it was unfair that a lot of
tests don't look at the good stuff. So
we look at all of the bacteria which has
been shown to be the most beneficial in
the microbiome. So for you, you had
pretty much high to very high levels of
uh good bacteria, which is great. Uh no
problems with that. And then we look at
bad bacteria. So we actually uh look at
about 500 different bacteria, but then
we zoom into the top 20 bad ones which
are really associated with things like
gum disease, decay, bad breath. So for
you, out of all the bacteria that we
looked at, you only had quite high
levels of one bacteria which was bad for
you. Um and so this bacteria is very
strongly associated with basically a lot
of buildup of um plaque in your mouth.
So, having not looked in your mouth, I
have no idea about your dental health or
anything like that. I would assume that
basically um you're a bit overdue on a
hygiene. Maybe maybe there's a lot of
plaque buildup going on um from that
result. But the rest of the bad
bacteria, so all of these ones we're
talking about,
the erectile dysfunction,
your erectile dysfunction ones fine. Um
your pen javalis is fine, you know,
fucleatum, those ones were actually uh
very good. Um then also on top of that
going back to the Alzheimer's. So we
look at those virolence factors
associated with punjavalis and you had
none of those virilence factors which is
also really good.
Okay.
Then we look at your genetic mutations.
So uh we've identified about 10
different genetic mutations which
increase your risk of decay and gum
disease. So uh for the decay out of the
five genetic mutations we looked at four
out of five of them you hatch. So that
means that you and maybe you you have
stopped it, but you are at a higher
chance of having a sweet tooth, of
having more acidic saliva. On top of
that, it might be that you if you're
stressed out or you're really unhappy,
some people will run to the casino,
others will run to the bottle. And for
you, you might actually be someone who
goes and has a chocolate bar and
actually enjoys sugar.
No comment.
Um, on top of that,
make your business.
Let's say you've had your sugar because
you are stressed out or whatever. You
also have been shown to have a genetic
mutation which means that your taste
perception is lower. So you need two
bars of chocolate, not just one.
No comment
to make you feel
That's the end of this podcast.
That's the end of this episode. I'll
give you my card.
Close your document. How dare you?
No, I mean it all it all squares with
reality. So please do keep going.
Um so that's your decay. uh situation in
terms of gum disease. Again, we look at
um certain mutations. So, there are some
mutations that can triple your risk of
gum disease. Um they can increase the
amount of inflammation that you release
from your mouth. So imagine um you there
are some people who even the smallest
amounts of bacteria they might have
great hygiene they have a few small bad
bacteria in their mouths they have
mutations which means that they respond
in a very hyperinflammatory and very
aggressive way and they will be at a
very high chance of gum disease. So in
your case um you had one mutation and I
would say out of all of the mutations
for gum disease it was the best one. So
it basically means that you have um
genetically you're more predisposed to
bacteria collecting around your gums.
Okay?
So you might be someone who actually
needs to go really regularly for a
hygiene and it's kind of a bit annoying
because you keep on getting build up or
they keep telling you to come back
because actually genetically you have
that in your saliva.
Mhm.
Um then afterwards we give you
personalized recommendations. So, we
tell you based on um everything that
we've seen, the bacteria, your
mutations, what your input from the
questionnaire, we tell you what
toothbrush would be good for you, what
supplements you should be taking, what
uh toothpaste, floss, um everything
basically, even chew sugar-free gum, all
of those types of things to um improve
your oral health and rebalance your
microbiome.
And you could tell all of that just from
me spitting in a tube once.
Yes. And then at the very end, we have a
list of all of the detected organisms.
So, like I said, we look at the top 20,
which we know are really bad for you,
but actually sometimes in some patients
will have like weird bacteria, really
high levels of weird bacteria. So, I had
one patient, she had really bad breath
and her gums were kind of okay, her
teeth were okay, there were no problems,
but she was like, I don't know what's
going on. So, she did the saliva test
and she had 40% of her oral microbiome
was made out of one bacteria. So, uh I
was searching this bacteria. I was like,
I've never heard of this bacteria
before. It is extremely prevalent in
dogs. So then I get back to her. I'm
like, "Do you have any dogs?" And she
was like, "Yeah, yeah, I have four four
or five dogs at home." And I was like,
"Do you kiss your dogs?" She was like,
"Yeah, of course I do. Like they're my
they're my babies." So she was kissing
her dogs and she was getting transfer of
bacteria from her dogs into her mouth
and that was what was making up her
whole microbiome.
And that was giving her bad breath.
Yeah. Yeah.
So what I did was I gave her um a
treatment recommendation
and no I gave all of her dogs I said you
need to take the specific um it's not
medication it's like a supplement so it
basically stops uh like buildup of
plaque in dogs teeth. So I was like your
dogs have gum disease basically so they
need to be treated if you wants to get
better. And after everyone got treated
her bad breath went and so did her dogs
as well. Uh, so are dog owners more
likely to have bad breath?
If you are smooching your dog then,
yeah, kind of. And your dog has gum
disease.
If you're kissing your dog.
Yeah.
Okay. Interesting. So, what are the very
having seen my results, but generally
from seeing the thousands and thousands
of results that you've seen?
Yeah. What are some of the the easiest
things that I could do to help correct
that situation and have perfect oral
health and a perfect oral microbiome?
So, um, what we've done is if you were
to do the test, you would have all of
the personalized recommendations for
you. So, we tell you to have green tea,
to have honey, all of those types of
things which have been shown um through
research to benefit your microbiome in
your case specifically. But if we were
just talking about someone who hasn't
done the microbiome test and wants to
just make sure that they have as
balanced of a microbiome as possible, um
diet is obviously very important. So,
what we're talking about that sugar
attack, making sure that you only have
one sugar attack a day. Um you're not
having sugar consistently because it
does alter your saliva um pH. Uh the
type of toothpaste that you're using. I
like to keep it simple. You don't need
to we don't need to make things super
complicated. You don't have to spend
that much money. Having the right
toothpaste, right toothbrush, and the
right floss is honestly as much as is
the most necessary thing that you need.
Okay. So, in terms of brushing though,
you give some sort of practical advice
around when we should brush.
Mhm.
What is that? And is there any time
where I shouldn't brush my teeth?
Uh, you should never brush straight
after anything acidic or sugary. So,
what you end up doing is is grinding the
sugar or the acid into your teeth.
So, actually, you should wait 30 minutes
until you brush your teeth.
That's interesting because when I eat
something sugary, I feel like I need to
brush my teeth to get rid of it.
Yeah. No. No. So, you want to wait 30
minutes. So, instead, you can chew some
sugar-free gum or um there are lots of
pastals that we use. So, like I use like
chewable mints um and you can chew one
of those and it will actually neutralize
your saliva really quickly so that you
don't have that acid causing the
demineralization. And do I spit or do I
rinse after I've brushed my teeth?
Spit. So, you should never rinse your
mouth out with water after you brush
your teeth. So, brush, brush, brush,
spit into the basin, and that's it.
Reason being, again, going back to my
sunscreen analogy. Um, imagine you spend
2 minutes putting all this lovely
sunscreen all over your skin to then
just go and have a shower right before
you go into the sun. So, with the
toothpaste, you you spend 2 minutes
putting all of that on your teeth. And
then if you rinse it, then you're
actually removing all of that goodness
from your teeth and gums, and it's kind
of like you haven't done anything.
Toothbrushes.
Yes.
Which toothbrush should I use? This one
or an electric one?
Um, I generally prefer an electric
toothbrush.
Um, usually they kind of do the work for
you. So, it just means that patients
have better oral health because most
people don't know how to brush their
teeth properly. Actually, we're never
really taught or trained or we get
taught by our parents. Our parents don't
really know. They've been taught by
their parents. So, a lot of people don't
actually know how to brush their teeth.
Number one. Number two, we often don't
brush for as long as we think that we
are. So, we're meant to brush for 2
minutes. The average is 20 to 30
seconds. And we think that we're
brushing for 2 minutes, but we're not.
So, with an electric toothbrush, it
times you and then also a pressure
sensor. So, the electric toothbrush
often will have a pressure sensor which
will show you whether or not you're
brushing too hard or you're brushing at
the right pressure and that will reduce
your chance of recession.
Can you show me on one of those tooth
models in front of you the area of the
mouth and teeth that people most often
overlook?
Yes.
Can I have your teeth?
So, I would say the area that people
usually um struggle with the most is the
insides of their very back bottom teeth.
So inside where next to my tongue
basically. Yeah. Just near your tongue
basically. What a lot of people will do
is they'll kind of they'll go on the
inside and they brush their teeth like
this. Okay. Whereas actually you want to
get your elbow up and you want to brush
a lot more at like a a 90° angle when
you're getting there.
It looks like you're brushing the gums a
little bit.
A little bit. Yeah. So you actually do
want to brush the gums a little bit. And
then when we're on the outsides of the
teeth, uh we want to kind of brush at a
30° angle. So rotational movements and
at a 30° angle. So, not straight like a
90°, but kind of towards the gum margin.
And by doing circular mo movements,
we're essentially kind of massaging the
gums and getting rid of the bacteria
from under the gum and then flicking it
out.
Okay.
Yeah. So, just like that. And then I
always tell everyone it's really
important to kind of have um a method
behind your toothbrushing. So, don't go
like brush and then go there and then up
there and you know cuz you'll never
brush properly. Um, so always start,
let's say, on the left hand side, go do
all the outsides and then do all the
biting surfaces and then do all the
insides and then do the same on the top
teeth as well.
And that model there, you've got another
model in front of you which is like a
see-through model. What does that show
us?
Um, so this is to show you um what an
implant looks like. A lot of people
don't know what implants look like um
and how it looks like if it was within
your jaw.
Also what all the roots look like. And
then also if you look on the other side,
you can see um this tooth which has the
black within it.
Yeah.
Um and it's got like a red bubble at the
root of it. So this is a tooth that's
had a root canal done to it and has an
infection at the root of that tooth. So
that's an abscess. Um and a lot of
people don't actually know what that
looks like. Um they only feel toothache,
but this is what toothache is actually
in their jaw.
When our teeth get teeths, is that the
right word? Is that a plural? When our
tooths, what's the plural of teeth? It's
teeth. Is it teeth? Yeah.
Yeah. When our teeth get stained,
yes,
what we often do is we'll take some sort
of whitening toothpaste or we'll go to a
a dentist or a hygienist or something
and ask them to whiten our teeth.
Now, I've always been a bit scared of
that because there must be a cost to
this whitening industry. Should we be
whitening our teeth? Is there any
healthy way to whiten our teeth?
Yes. Um, so you've got two different
types of staining. One which is
extrinsic. So that's basically your
coffee, your tea, your smoking. super
easy to get rid of. Um you just have to
go to your hygienist and get a hygiene
done and they'll get rid of the stains
um pretty quickly. Um or you can try a
whitening toothpaste. Be very careful
with a lot of those whitening toothpaste
because they can be quite abrasive and
damage the enamel actually. So it's kind
of like exfoliating your teeth, but your
teeth don't grow back. So if you keep on
exfoliating and and getting rid of that
surface layer of enamel over a long
amount of time, that can be quite uh an
issue and quite problematic.
You get sensitive teeth. Yeah, sensitive
teeth and then the underlying um tooth
will start to shine through and that's
quite yellow. So, you actually start
ending up doing the the opposite of what
you wanted to do. Um then whitening. So,
you could you should do that
professionally. Um don't go and buy some
over the counter online thing. Um
because a lot of the time either they
don't have the the right percentages and
they can actually damage the teeth and
the gums uh really badly. So, you want
to get that done professionally. um if
you get it done by a good brand and even
within the professional world there are
some whitening um products out there
which are really bad for the teeth and
others which are actually really good
for the teeth. So we use one in
particular um it's called a niton and uh
the whitening for one day is the
equivalent of having a Coca-Cola. Um so
thinking about it I mean I'm sure
everyone has had one Coca-Cola in their
life. Having a Coca-Cola every day for
let's say five or six days is okay in
the grand scheme of things. is not going
to massively damage your your teeth at
all.
Okay. So, there is safe ways to do it.
Okay, good. And is there any way to
remove plaque yourself without having to
go to a dental hygienist?
Um, so you can try a water flosser. Um,
I've just bought one of those things,
but it doesn't feel powerful enough cuz
when I go to the hygienist, I don't know
what they're using, but it like it like
it's so strong.
Yeah.
That it like blasts my mouth off. My
mouth feels so different after.
Yeah.
And I wanted to know if I could buy one
of those for my home,
but I think it's a little bit dangerous.
Um well the reason I think that the
water flossers are not that high
intensity is because people can um
damage their teeth if they don't use it
correctly. So kind of no there are some
supplements that you can take to reduce
the amount of plaque that builds up um
and that actually does work quite
effectively.
I mean what are you there are two more
there there's a couple more things there
that you have in your pile that we not
talked about.
These are probiotics.
Okay.
So going back to our microbiome uh
probiotics are basically good bacteria.
So, um, not everyone needs them, but a
probiotic, uh, essentially will, uh, put
good bacteria into the microbiome, and
if it's got the right environment to
live in, then it will continue to grow
there. Basically,
if you're eating the right things,
Exactly. If you're eating the right
things, you've got prebiotics, you're,
you know, all of those types of things,
then, then this will be really
effective. So, these are two different
options. This is a mouthwash. Um and
again on the microbiome test that we've
created or Alice one um we look at all
the levels of good bacteria and then
we'll recommend a probiotic based on
what good bacteria you are missing. So a
lot of us are actually genetically we've
been born without certain good bacteria
in our microbiomes and so this is really
lovely to supplement them. So this is um
it's a mouthwash but it's in a powder
form. So, you take a teaspoon, you mix
it with some water, and that activates
the probiotic, and then you rinse it
around, um, and you swallow it. So, it's
a kind of a twoin one for your gut. This
is a pill, so it's a tablet. You chew
it, um, and then you can swallow it. So,
this is again, this is super easy, too.
Um, and and I love these as well. Very
easy to use.
Victoria, what's the most important
thing that we haven't talked about today
that we should have talked about today?
Uh the only thing that I think you
haven't mentioned that your viewers
might benefit from is the use of straws.
Straws are very very important to to use
um for sugar and also for acid. So
drinking through a straw actually helps
you bypass um all of your teeth. So if
you're having something acidic or really
sugary or even something staining, then
it bypasses the teeth and goes straight
to back of your throat so you can
swallow it. Um so this helps reduces
your chance of decay of tooth wear and
also staining as well. But specifically
if it's bad for you because you I'm sure
there's some things which are good for
the oral microbiome that you do want to
be in the mouth.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So if you're taking
your probiotics or whatever then of
course those are great. Um like for
example um you know I'm human. I like a
nice Coca-Cola once in a while and I'll
drink it through a straw. Um or if I
have alcohol I'll also drink that
through a straw as long as it's not
wine. But
about smoking and vaping.
Um so yeah smoking and vaping. Neither
of them are good for the oral
microbiome. Um it goes back to um dry
mouth. So smoking will dry your mouth
out and then you don't have the saliva
and the saliva can't do what it wants
to. It stops um vascularization. So it
stops blood flow to your mouth. And so a
lot of uh smokers actually will not have
bleeding gums. That doesn't mean that
they don't have gum disease, but because
they um are smoking so much, the blood
vessels are already really tight and
constricted from the nicotine. Um so
they don't ever get bleeding gums even
though they have gum disease. Um and
then the third thing is that actually we
know that smoking is very strongly
associated one of the biggest risk
factors for gum disease.
If someone's now curious about their own
microbiome and the work that you're
doing what is the sort of easiest entry
point to learn more to get themselves
checked or to I don't know to resolve
some of the issues that are causal or a
consequence of having an unhealthy
microbiome. Where where do they start?
How do they find you?
We have a clinic in central London
called the Health Society. Um we opened
about a year and a half ago now. And our
aim was to put their mouth back into the
body to explain to patients exactly
what's going on in their mouth. And we
can do that through microbiome testing,
other saliva tests. Um we look at your
blood glucose levels, your vitamin D
levels. We've got packages. We have an
infrared sauna. We have a nutritionist.
And the idea is that we're working all
together because one of the issues I was
seeing was that patients, they want to
understand what's going on in their
mouth and they want to optimize it, but
they don't understand a lot of what
dentistry is all about. We used to live
in a world where the dentist would say,
"Okay, you need two fillings and you've
got gum disease and you're not brushing
your teeth." And that was the end of it.
And you would just listen to them and
you get your work done. But now we are
trying to essentially decode dentistry
and explain it in a way that patients
can understand. So I would say I'm
biased but come over, come to the
clinic, we can explain everything. Um or
you can do an oral microbiome test and
you can actually understand yourself
what bacteria, what genetic mutations
you have, what inflammation you have,
what products you should start using and
then based on that decide on what
dentist you want to go to for any
treatment if needed.
What if I'm in Australia or Canada or
New Zealand or America? what can I do?
Um, so we're actually rolling out the
oral microbiome test to all of those
countries. Um, so you can actually buy
at the moment uh through that. Uh, you'd
have to email us, but otherwise that,
you know, I'm not the only one. There
are other people who are doing this type
of dentistry um, and are thinking in
this type of way. So, you would have to
do a little bit of research, but um, I
guess maybe follow me on Instagram and I
can give some top tips. I'll I'll link
all your your website, your social
channels below, and if anyone wants to
send you an email, you might get a
couple of emails warning you now. Um, so
you got to be careful what you wish for,
but but I'll I'll put all those details
below. Um, we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest,
not knowing who they're leaving it for.
Okay.
And the question that's been left for
you is, what is the most important
relationship in your life and why?
Um
this is going to cause you problems.
Yeah, I know. So
um I would say um my mother I think that
is the most important relationship for
uh me. I think she um has been uh one of
my biggest mentors. She's been my
biggest cheerleader, my supporter. Um
she's hard on us, but that has led to me
being the person that I am. Um, and I
think that if I don't have a good
relationship with her, um, then I can't
have a good relationship with other
people. She's taught me respect. She's
taught me how to, you know, handle
myself around people. Um, so yeah, I
guess, uh, big up to my mom.
Is she Is she Iranian?
She is. Yeah,
she's Iranian. Yeah. And your father?
He is French American.
French American. And if we sit here in
10 years time, what are you hoping the
world looks like as it relates to the
oral microbiome, people's understanding
of it, the the regulations? What are you
hoping for? If you could wave a wand.
I am hoping that um the mouth is put
back into the body in the sense that
dentistry and medicine are fully
integrated within each other. So you can
go to your dentist and you can get a
saliva test and that could flag up
issues with your heart or diabetes and
you will go and see your diabetist. Um
and we link everything together. Uh also
my other dream is that people start
testing their saliva and they understand
that you know blood is not the only way
that we can understand things that are
going on within our body.
Dr. Victoria Samson, thank you so much.
Uh, I find this so unbelievably
fascinating in part because I've never
heard about any of this stuff before.
And I I do this job, you know, I've done
it quite a few times now. So, I've
spoken to a lot of health experts that
talk about the brain or I don't know,
infertility or um the gut microbiome,
but never one that looks at the body and
our overall picture of health through
the front door or the lens of our oral
microbiome. And so, it's really really
inspired me. And I think sometimes on
this podcast, I just love having these
conversations because sometimes it you
just need a little bit more information
about the importance of something to
make even a small change in your life.
And as it relates to our microbiomes,
our oral health, um our brain health,
and all of these things, even a small
change can have a big downstream impact
when we're talking about areas of our
health where things compound over time
and can either compound for us or
against us. And so, thank you so much
for doing the work that you do and
shining a light on this. work has been
really seinal in sort of driving the
conversation but also turning the lights
on to to the state and importance of our
oral health and I'm sure that if we sit
here in 10 years time you would have
impacted many many many millions of
people um and their overall picture of
health through the lens of the oral
microbiome because of the work you're
doing and the message you're putting out
there and that is quite something. So
congratulations well done and thank you.
Thank you so much. Thanks.
probably shouldn't be sharing this yet,
but you are our Diary of SEO community.
So, I wanted to give you a small first
look at a product that we're about to
launch exclusively. This is the 1%
diary. If you know me, you'll know that
one of the most uttered phrases in the
walls of my office is the 1% mindset. It
is a philosophy, a mindset, and a habit
that has absolutely changed my life. And
if you ask me, it is the reason that
this podcast has grown in the way that
it has. By understanding the power of
compounding 1%s, you can absolutely
change your outcomes in your life. It
isn't about drastic transformations or
quick wins. It's about the small
consistent actions that have a lasting
change in your outcomes. So 2 years ago,
we started the process of creating this
beautiful diary. And it's truly
beautiful. Inside there's lots of
pictures, lots of inspiration and
motivation as well, some interactive
elements. And the purpose of this diary
is to help you identify, stay focused
on, develop consistency with the 1%s
that will ultimately change your life.
We have a limited number of these 1%
diaries. And if you want to do this with
me, then join our waiting list. I can't
guarantee all of you that join the
waiting list will be able to get one,
but if you join now, you have a higher
chance. The waiting list can be found at
the diary.com. I'll link it below, but
that is the diary.com.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.